Update Meilisearch on the cloud (#2053)
meilisearch/documentation: learn/cookbooks/update_cloud.md

> # Update Meilisearch on the cloud

Author: ```suggestion
# Update Meilisearch on cloud platforms
```

# Update Meilisearch on cloud platforms

::: danger
This guide does not work for versions below v0.15. For more information, [contact support](https://discord.gg/meilisearch)
:::

The following guide walks you through the steps required to update your Meilisearch instance from an older version to the most recent on DigitalOcean, AWS, or GCP using the Meilisearch official images.

> You can [connect via SSH](https://docs.digitalocean.com/products/droplets/how-to/connect-with-ssh/) to your cloud instance, and depending on the user you are connecting with (root, admin, etc.), you may need to prefix some commands with `sudo`.

Author: ```suggestion
You can connect via SSH to your cloud instance, and depending on the user you are connecting with (root, admin, etc.), you may need to prefix some commands with `sudo`.
```

::: tip
If you are using v0.22 or above, use our [migration script](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch-migration) to update to a newer Meilisearch version without losing data or settings.
:::

## Step 1: Verify your database version

Before we begin, you need to verify the version of Meilisearch that's compatible with your database, in other words, the version that indexed the data.

Use the get version endpoint to check your Meilisearch version:

```sh
curl \
  -X GET 'http://<your-domain-name>/version' \
  -H 'Authorization: Bearer API_KEY'
```

::: warning

> If Meilisearch returns a [`missing_authorization_header`](/reference/errors/error_codes.md#missing-authorization-header) error code, you might be using v0.24 or below. Change the authorization header to `X-MEILI-API-KEY: apiKey`:

Author: Sorry, this should have been `X-Meili-API-Key: API_KEY`

Start by verifying that all attributes are included in the displayed attributes list:

```sh
# replace {index_uid} with your index's unique id
curl \
  -X GET 'http://<your-domain-name>/indexes/{index_uid}/settings/displayed-attributes' \
  -H 'X-Meili-API-Key: API_KEY'  

```

If the response is `{'displayedAttributes': '["*"]'}`, you can proceed on to [step 3](#step-3-create-the-dump).

If it's something else, save the current list of displayed attributes to restore it after the migration is complete. Next, reset the list of displayed attributes to its default value (`["*"]`) using:

```sh
curl \
  -X DELETE 'http://<your-domain-name>/indexes/{index_uid}/settings/displayed-attributes' \
  -H 'X-Meili-API-Key: API_KEY'  
```

This command returns an `updateId`. You can use this to track the status of the operation.

```sh
# replace {updateId} with the updateId returned by the previous request
curl \
  -X GET 'http://<your-domain-name>/indexes/{index_uid}/updates/{updateId}' \
  -H 'X-Meili-API-Key: API_KEY'  
```

Once the status updates to `processed`, you're good to go.

## Step 3: Create the dump

> Before creating your dump, ensure that your [dump directory](/learn/configuration/instance_options.md#dumps-directory) is accessible. By default, dumps are created in a folder called `dumps` in the configuration file directory: `/var/opt/meilisearch/dumps`

Reviewer: >By default, dumps are created in a folder called `dumps` in the configuration file directory: `/var/opt/meilisearch/dumps`

Not sure if it's relevant to the user, but it's not in this folder by default it's been configured to be in this folder by default for the cloud provider

Author: >it's been configured to be in this folder by default for the cloud provider

Does this apply to all cloud providers, @alallema?

Author: So something like this would be correct?

>By default, cloud platforms are configured to store dumps in the `/var/opt/meilisearch/dumps` directory

Reviewer: >Does this apply to all cloud providers, @alallema?

Yes, all cloud providers are configured the same way.

>By default, cloud platforms are configured to store dumps in the /var/opt/meilisearch/dumps directory

Perfect! That said I said it just for information, but I leave it to your appreciation if yes or no it is relevant to tell the user, maybe it's not ...

  "startedAt": "2022-06-21T16:10:29.218297Z",
  "finishedAt": "2022-06-21T16:10:29.244169Z"
}
```

## Step 4: Stop the Meilisearch instance

If you haven't done it yet, connect via SSH to your cloud instance and execute the following command to stop Meilisearch. Remember you may need to prefix it with `sudo` if you are not connected as root.

```
systemctl stop meilisearch
```

## Step 5: Create a backup

Instead of deleting `data.ms`, we suggest creating a backup in case something goes wrong. `data.ms` can be found at `/var/lib/meilisearch/data.ms`.

Move the binary of the current Meilisearch version and the database to the `tmp/` folder:

```
mv /usr/bin/meilisearch /tmp
mv /var/lib/meilisearch/data.ms /tmp/
```

## Step 6: Install the desired version of Meilisearch

Install the latest version of Meilisearch using:

```sh
# replace {meilisearch_version} with the version of your choice. Use the format: `vX.X.X`
curl "https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/releases/download/{meilisearch_version}/meilisearch-linux-amd64" --output meilisearch --location --show-error
```

Give execute permission to the Meilisearch binary:

```
chmod +x meilisearch
```

> Move the new Meilisearch binary to the systemd directory containing the executable files:

Reviewer: `/usr/bin` is the standard directory on Unix-like operating systems that contains the executable files, not the `systemd` directory.

Once Meilisearch v1 is released, this two-step process won't be necessary as v1 will be compatible with dumps from all previous versions.
:::

Importing a dump requires indexing all the documents it contains. Depending on the size of your dataset, this process can take a long time and cause a spike in memory usage.

::: danger `_geo` field in v0.27, v0.28, and v0.29
You might not be able to import your dump due to Meilisearch allowing malformed `_geo` fields in the above-mentioned versions. Please ensure the `_geo` field follows the [correct format](/learn/advanced/geosearch.md#preparing-documents-for-location-based-search).
:::

## Step 8: Restart Meilisearch as a service

Once your dump has been correctly imported, press `Ctrl`+`C`  to stop Meilisearch. Next, execute the following command to run the script to configure Meilisearch and restart it as a service:

```
meilisearch-setup
```

If required, set `displayedAttributes` back to its previous value using the [update displayed attributes endpoint](/reference/api/settings.md#update-displayed-attributes).

> ## Step 9: Clean files or rollback

Author: ```suggestion
## Step 9: Delete backup files or rollback
```

Start by verifying that all attributes are included in the displayed attributes list:

```sh
# replace {index_uid} with your index's unique id
curl \
  -X GET 'http://<your-domain-name>/indexes/{index_uid}/settings/displayed-attributes' \
  -H 'X-Meili-API-Key: API_KEY'  

```

If the response is `{'displayedAttributes': '["*"]'}`, you can proceed on to [step 3](#step-3-create-the-dump).

If it's something else, save the current list of displayed attributes to restore it after the migration is complete. Next, reset the list of displayed attributes to its default value (`["*"]`) using:

```sh
curl \
  -X DELETE 'http://<your-domain-name>/indexes/{index_uid}/settings/displayed-attributes' \
  -H 'X-Meili-API-Key: API_KEY'  
```

This command returns an `updateId`. You can use this to track the status of the operation.

```sh
# replace {updateId} with the updateId returned by the previous request
curl \
  -X GET 'http://<your-domain-name>/indexes/{index_uid}/updates/{updateId}' \
  -H 'X-Meili-API-Key: API_KEY'  
```

Once the status updates to `processed`, you're good to go.

## Step 3: Create the dump

> Before creating your dump, ensure that your [dump directory](/learn/configuration/instance_options.md#dumps-directory) is accessible. By default, dumps are created in a folder called `dumps` in the configuration file directory: `/var/opt/meilisearch/dumps`

Author: ```suggestion
Before creating your dump, ensure that your [dump directory](/learn/configuration/instance_options.md#dumps-directory) is accessible. By default, cloud platforms are configured to store dumps in the `/var/opt/meilisearch/dumps` directory.
```
